# Hospitality_Analytics_Project

Hotel Booking Trends and Revenue Analysis for quater 2022

# Introduction

The hospitality industry is highly dynamic, with seasonal fluctuations and demand, customer prefrences, and competetive pricing stratergies. Analyzing historical data can help in improving occupancy rates, optimizing revenue and enhancing guest experiences.

Here we have AtliQ Grands who owns multiple five-star hotels across India. They have been in the hospitality industry for the past 20 years. Due to strategic moves from other competitors and ineffective decision-making in management, AtliQ Grands are losing its market share and revenue in the luxury/business hotels category. As a strategic move, the managing director of AtliQ Grands wanted to incorporate “Business and Data Intelligence” to regain their market share and revenue.

# Objective

* Identifying factors that impact hotels booking rates
* Analyzing customer reviews to improve service quality
* Finding out peak and off-peak seasons for better resource planning
* Monitoring performance of the hotels for future revenue predictions
* Optimize pricing stratergies based on demand trends

# Data Collection and Prepration

* Data Sources
  * Excel spreadsheets containing data of hotels, rooms, dates, bookings.

* Data Description
  * Booking Data: Check-in-date, Check-out-date, Room type, Revenue generated
  * Customer Data: Demographics, booking platform
  * Operational Data: Room Availability, Occupancy Rates, Cancellations
  * Review Data: Customer ratings
  * Hotel Data: Hotel Name, Category, Capacity

* Data Cleaning
  * Removing duplicates entries for bookings
  * Handling missing values in pricing and ratings
  * Standardizing date formats, room categories, currency conversions
  * Creating custom columns for finding out weekends and weekdays

# Key Metrics and insights

 * Key Metrics
   * Revenue per available room (RevPAR): Revenue that could be generated by all the available rooms
   * Daily booked room nights (DBRN): Average of how many rooms that were booked on a daily basis
   * Average daily rate (ADR): This refers to the average amount that is made by the property daily
   * Daily sellable room nights (DSRN): Average of how many rooms were ready to sell on a daily basis
   * Realisation %: This refers to percentage of successful check-outs that happened over all bookings 
   * Daily utilized room nights (DURN): Average of how many rooms were actually utilized by the customers on a daily basis

 * Descriptive Analysis
   * A total of 1.69 billion revenue was generated for the analysed time period.
   * The occupancy rate during this period was at 57.8%.
   * Average ratings as given by the customers were at 3.62 out of 5.
   * Out of the total revenue generated, 1.16 billion was generated in weekdays whereas weekends gave 5.24 million.
   * Occupancy was seen higher on weekends than weekdays.
   * Total bookings that were made during the weekdays were 70% while the remaining 30% were on weekends.
   * Bookings made by people through online platforms were slightly higher than offline platforms.
   * Majority of bookings were made by other booking platforms contributing 41% of the total share.

 * Financial Performance
   * Elite rooms had the most booking through this period and presidential had the least.
   * The maximum revenue was made by Atiq Exotica (316M) and the least was by Atliq Seasons (65M).
   * In all the four cities, Elite rooms had the highest booking percentage.
   * Atiq Bay made the highest revenue in Bangalore and Hyderabad due to the city's tropical climate.
   * In Delhi Atliq Palace were at the top because of the presence of goverment officials and being the capital.
   * Whereas in Mumbai, Atliq Exotica made the most due to high net worth people.

 * Market Analysis 
   * Revenue was the lowest in the month of May as comapred to the other months, it went up in June but was still negative whereas it became positive in the month of July.
   * RevPAR was also down in May but went up in the later months of June and July which was due to availability of new rooms.
   * DSRN was seen being constant throughout this whole period.
   * Occupancy was at -15% in May and then went up to 17% due to the beginning of the holiday season in June and went down in July with the end of holidays.
   * ADR was at constant levels in May and June which indicates that the price of properties were kept nearly same during this period. It grew in June by 0.4% which tells that pricing were increases during the holiday period.
   * Realisation % also showed slight growth in May and June indicating more customers were served during this period.
   * Luxury properties were seen contributing most (62%) in the revenue share as compared to the business properties.
   * On the booking platforn level, realisation % was seen being constant at 70% telling that all rooms were booked and utilized successfully by all platforms.
   * ADR was fluctuating on the platform level with direct offline being the highest, which means most revenue was generated through this and therefore maximum bookings.
   * The least amount of revenue was generated by direct offline therefore the least bookings from Atliq's own website.
   * Weekdays and weekends had almost the same ADR which means the pricing was kept the same during both the days, meanwhile RevPAR was higher on weekends which indicates that more rooms were made available during weekends to generate maximum revenue.
   * Occupancy was also more on weekends at 63% while on weekdays it was 57%. 
   


























  
